>> Is there a deeper, hidden,
more esoteric meaning behind
the Hollywood films that
we all love to watch?
I'm Jay Dyer.
>> And I'm Jay Weidner and
this is Hollywood Decoded.
[THEME MUSIC]
>> Christopher Nolan was who
rebooted the Batman series
starting in 2005, and then the
big blockbuster trilogy that
emerged from that was full
of all kinds of esoteric,
hidden occult meanings.
And that's what we're going
to do today is dissect that
and look at the interplay
of secret societies
of giant geopolitical wars
between the East and the West,
of billionaire capitalists
like Bruce Wayne,
and how this all
kind of operates
under the veil of a comic
book story, interestingly.
>> Yeah, it's a very
mature comic book story.
In this trilogy, he
does an incredible job.
And the entire
ethos of the trilogy
is really of
vigilantism, in a way,
and how there is a place in
the world for vigilantes.
>> I think what's fascinating
for me was I wasn't expecting
Bruce Wayne to get
into a secret society.
Although if you watch the
old series with Adam West,
it's actually
referenced in the series
that his father was a
member of Skull And Bones.
So we get the idea that there is
this secret society background
to the character of Batman.
So what does he do?
Well, he decides he wants to
go a left hand path, the path
of darkness and difficulty.
For his initiation, he
travels to the Far East.
He's a part of the
secret society.
And he realizes that
he's got to learn
the dark arts, the
black side of things,
and that he has got to
learn the skills of a ninja.
So he learns
psychological warfare,
he learns black magic,
and these kinds of things,
basically to trick the opponent.
And he's led into this by this
character of Ra's al Ghul,
played by Liam Neeson, who is
kind of his handler, in a way.
He's the head of
this secret society.
But Bruce Wayne doesn't
really know the goals
of this secret society.
He's been led up this
ladder of initiation.
His consciousness is being
opened to these new ideas.
But we're going to find
out that in the end,
he's going to be
very much opposed
to the designs of this secret.
So he's almost, in a way,
a kind of whistleblower
in that he comes out
of this dark side
and realizes that
he's got to oppose it.
>> In fact, the plot is a little
bit like the story of Buddha.
Buddha is a rich kid, of
a very sheltered life.
And then one day he sees
poverty and poor people
and he immediately
goes on a quest.
Only in the movie, he
goes on the left hand path
as opposed the path
that Buddha took.
But that would be
the path you would
take if you were a rich kid and
everything had been sheltered
your whole life and you caused
the death of your parents
by your own fears
and being sheltered.
>> Exactly.
Yeah, so he's
traumatized and that's
what causes him to go
down this path, because
of the death of his parents.
And then he also
falls down the well.
So this is also subconscious.
Nolan is evoking all that
Jungian archetype and imagery
that we're going to
look at in this film.
So the first half is
him being initiated
into this secret society.
>> Breathe in your fears.
Face them.
To conquer fear, you
must become fear.
You must bask in the
fear of other men.
And men fear most
what they cannot see.
>> Imagine being given your
ninja suit and then breathing
in a bunch of--
>> Psychedelics.
>> A bunch of psychedelics.
Oh, here's 20 ninjas for
you to take on right here.
>> You have to become
a terrible thought.
A wraith.
You have to become an idea.
>> I mean, the whole point
of this is facing the fear.
And the Nolans, both
Christopher and his brother,
that do these kinds of
stories so many times over
are always using
Jungian archetypes.
And a big part of Carl
Jung's psychoanalysis
was that you had to face up
to the thing that traumatized
you and scared you the most.
Maybe it was a death of
somebody, maybe something bad
happened to you in your past.
But facing up to
that is the means
by which you overcome that.
And then the fear, the trauma
is then the servant to you.
You're no longer a
servant to your fear.
And that's really the
point of this ritual,
ultimately, in the film.
>> Yeah, and then later in the
film when he goes back to his
house in Gotham, the bats, he
goes back down into the well
and faces the bats.
Only this time he's not afraid.
And the bats caused his
parents to die, actually,
because it's a bat character
in the theater play
that he's watching that
causes him to get scared.
And so yeah, he's bringing all
these Jungian archetypes back.
And just that bats are
creatures of the night
and you can't really see
them and they're quiet
and they're blind too.
So it's kind of interesting
that the bat symbols
are being used by the Nolans
here as the archetype.
>> Well, what's interesting
is that when he goes up
into the mountains
of Tibet, I think,
and he learns the
secrets of this order,
he finds out that they have
maybe a darker purpose,
not what he wants
to be a part of.
So this actually evokes the
ideas of real secret societies.
Madam Blavatsky is very
famous for going into Tibet
and meeting this so-called
Great White Brotherhood
and they gave her these
secrets and mysteries.
And then Aleister Crowley
did the exact same thing,
where he went up
into the mountains
and met with these
Tibetans and felt
that he could blend Eastern
and Western mysticism
into this secret society
that maybe even felt,
at times, that Western
society needed to be destroyed
to bring balance.
And that's exactly what
Ra's al Ghul's character
tries to do in this film.
And they do it not just by
his psychological warfare
on Gotham, which represents
America or New York
or whatever.
They do it also by drug
warfare, biowarfare.
So we're actually going to
see that the deep state plans
that people like
John P. Holdren, who
wrote a famous book, "Eco
Science" talking about how we
all need to be
drugged and sterilized
and so forth for de-population.
That jives perfectly
with this secret society
that Ra's al Ghul's running.
>> And again, we see that the
goal of this secret society is
the apocalypse.
And they think that the
scourging of the planet
is the good thing and
that this is a higher
purpose to the apocalypse.
And just like Ra's al
Ghul, he can't understand
why Batman can't see the
plan, that actually cities
are a bad thing and that
Gotham is a bad thing
and it needs to be wiped out.
>> Exactly.
And so what we're
going to see here,
we mentioned Carl
Jung and archetypes,
is that there's a positive
aspect to archetypes,
but there's also a
dark side to this.
So members of the secret
society here have actually
mastered the dark side of it.
They know how to
manipulate archetypes
for the purpose of
fear and keeping people
imprisoned to their own fears.
And that's what
we're going to see
with the use of pharmacology
by this character who
is also a member of the dark
society here, Scarecrow.
>> Scarecrow.
>> What's scarecrow?
>> Patients suffering
delusional episodes often focus
their paranoia on an
external tormentor.
Usually one conforming
to Jungian archetypes.
In this case, a scarecrow.
>> He's drugged?
>> Psycho pharmacology
is my [INAUDIBLE]..
I'm a strong advocate.
Outside he was a giant.
In here only the mind
can grant you power.
>> You enjoy the reversal.
>> I respect the mind's
power over the body.
It's why I do what I do.
>> So the secret society
knows key members
of Gotham's communities,
upstanding citizens,
to go for as control points
to take down the city.
And then you have this
character Scarecrow
who is the archetypal
MKULTRA doctor.
And that's what he's saying.
He's like, I know how to
manipulate archetypes.
I know how to control
these people's minds
through their fears.
And if I can control their
fears and give them their fears,
I can control them.
>> That's exactly
what he's doing,
and he's using drugs to do it.
And then we find out
later that they're
going to bomb Gotham
with these drugs
and it's going to
be total chaos.
And that could be a plan,
actually, already thought up
in the deep state somewhere.
Because what a perfect
way to take total control
than to spread some drug that
causes everybody to freak out.
>> Right.
And what's interesting
is that the philosophy
of the secret
society is very Far
Eastern in the sense of duality.
So they see good and evil as
kind of actually flip sides
of the same coin.
So when Ra's al Ghul
comes to Bruce Wayne
to try to justify
what he's doing,
he's burning down Wayne
manor, and he's like,
don't you understand
that it all has
to be burned down because that's
just what needs to happen,
and we're going to
restore balance.
So that's when Bruce Wayne
is really figuring out
that he doesn't buy into
the negative aspects
of this secret society.
He realizes he's
got to fight it.
And that's who
he's going to fight
throughout the whole series
is this same secret society.
>> Well, it's very interesting
because many people
don't realize that the
entire attack by Genghis Khan
on Europe, that the entire
attack when Genghis Khan
attacked Europe was that
Genghis Khan thought,
everyone thinks he's
this horrible guy,
but actually he thought cities
were evil and that only evil
could have come out of cities,
and that since the cities were
really big in Europe, that's
why they needed to be wiped out.
And that was his
whole philosophy.
And Ra's al Ghul has
that same philosophy.
He's coming from the East,
learning the arts of the East,
and now he wants
to conquer the city
and destroy it because
there's nothing there
but pernicious evil.
>> Exactly.
So let's look at the League
of Shadows secret society
philosophy.
>> The League of Shadows has
been a check against human
corruption for
thousands of years.
We sacked Rome, loaded trade
ships with plague rats,
burned London to the ground.
Every time a
civilization reaches
the pinnacle of
its decadence, we
return to restore the balance.
>> Gotham isn't beyond saving.
Give me more time.
There are good people here.
>> You are defending a city
so corrupt we have infiltrated
every level of its
infrastructure.
>> So in this clip here,
he lays out the philosophy.
And I know that you notice
the same thing that I
put in my book
about this section
was that this is the
Rothschild house.
So that needs to be mentioned,
because so many weird things
have happened in this house.
And I wonder if Christopher
Nolan didn't choose it
for that reason.
All kinds of esoteric stuff.
The Beatles actually did
transcendental meditation
and Maharishi Mahesh
Yogi in this mansion.
So I think Bruce Wayne has
this mansion for a reason.
And here in the middle of it
is this character Ra's al Ghul
with this dark philosophy.
>> We know that Christopher
Nolan's a huge Kubrick fan,
and Kubrick used the same house
I believe in "Eyes Wide Shut"
where the orgy took place.
So I think that it's
a nod to Kubrick
also, that he
understands what he's
saying, just a few years
earlier when that film came out.
And so I think that Ra's al
Ghul thinks he's a good guy.
That's what we
have to understand.
Even though he is a bad guy--
>> Just like the Joker, he
thinks chaos is a necessary
thing.
This dualism.
>> Right.
And this is the whole point
of Nolan's kind of dichotomy
between vigilantism and chaos.
How far can a vigilante go
to stop the chaos before he
becomes an agent of
chaos, which he'll
get into in the later versions.
But that's the crux of what
Nolan is trying to say here.
>> What I think is really
interesting about Nolan
as a director is that so many
times not only does he like
to play with Jungian archetypes,
but he's obsessed with
the labyrinth, the
image of a maze.
I mean, it's even in
his company's symbol.
So when we watch these films,
if we think about something
like "Inception,"
there it is actually
a labyrinth that is the psyche.
And the psyche in its trip
into the lowest levels
of the subconscious.
If you remember Cobb, the
Leonardo DiCaprio character,
he has to go down to the
basement of his subconscious,
of his soul, and
meet with Mal, which
is kind of the Latin word
for maliciousness or evil,
this former wife character that
he's had a very hard time with.
He didn't get along
with her and that
is the source of his trauma.
And so throughout
that film, he's
layers down, stuck in
this kind of dream world.
And it's all about him
finding his way out
through facing his trauma.
And again, other films,
it just amazes me
that Nolan consistently pulls
this off in such a good way.
He repeats it, but
he pulls it off.
Think about "The
Prestige," for example.
In "The Prestige" what Nolan
does is he has the doubling.
Again, he's got two
Christian Bale characters.
And the whole thing is,
it's all about illusions.
And there's that
famous scene where
they're trying to figure out
how this act is pulled off
by this Chinese magician,
who is hobbling around
and they can't figure out where
he produces this magical bowl
that he's got.
And one of the Bales
says, he does it,
he pulls it off because
he lives his routine.
He lives his act.
He's so committed
to his act that it's
a daily thing for him.
So here we have that
idea of method acting.
And that's what so
much of Hollywood
has become dominated by
in the last few decades
is method acting.
And this is all
about, as Stanislavski
says, you losing
consciousness and letting
something from the subconscious
come up and take over you.
This is what Plato
talked about when
he argued with the
philosophers of his day
and the actors of his day.
There's a famous
dialogue called Ion
where they talked about
losing their conscious mind
and giving it over
to something else.
So what I see Nolan as,
and even in "Interstellar,"
is he's mining the
subconscious through his films.
That's the real
labyrinth and psyche
that we're having to solve is
the mind and the subconscious.
>> It's interesting, because one
of the subplots for the whole
Batman series is that
Michael Caine, his butler,
is very worried that Bruce
Wayne is going to become Batman.
You've become this character.
He keeps warning him,
what are you doing?
Why are you doing this?
You're going way too far.
And it's the same thing
that the actors face.
We've talked about
this in other shows
and why actors fall in love
with each other on the set
and then after the movie's over,
they aren't in love anymore.
It's because they've
become that character.
And that character that, oh,
I have to love this person
and make sure that
my love is sincere.
This happened, actually,
to Christian Bale
on the set of a
"Terminator" movie where
he became the tough guy.
And there is this famous clip
of him yelling and screaming
at the cinematographer
and he's the tough guy.
And then he even says later
when he apologizes to the guy,
I was so into my role that
I couldn't get out of it.
And so I think this is a
really big thing in Hollywood
and a big psychological
problem that people
like Lynch and Christopher
Nolan are addressing
is this immersion
into this role.
And Batman gets so
immersed into the role
that he does destructive things.
>> Well, if you remember even
Jack Nicholson warned Heath
Ledger about the
role of the Joker.
And then he says, if you
do that in a method acting
away and immerse yourself
in the role of the Joker,
it almost seems to bring out
dark things in your psyche.
And not too long after
that, Heath Ledger's
in a movie, a
Terry Gilliam film,
"Imaginarium of Dr. Parnassus"
and he's part of a ritual
in the movie and he dies.
And then in real life,
we see Heath Ledger died.
So lot of suspicious, weird
things going on there.
But I think that this is
the reality of playing
with the subconscious.
I mean, I think our
psyches are precious.
Our consciousness is
something that's a gift to us,
it's precious.
We can't just play with it and
be like the Scarecrow character
who wants to be the
doctor [INAUDIBLE] who's
going to bomb everybody's
minds on drugs
and manipulate these
shades, the union
archetypes to try
to control people.
But that's exactly
what the Pentagon
does through the war on terror.
All it is is a
manipulation of things
that we're supposed to fear.
What's that famous documentary
by Adam Curtis about power
of nightmares, I think?
It's all about the
manipulation of the things
that the culture itself fears.
>> That's right.
If it bleeds, it leads.
And that's the news
media, Hollywood,
they're all trying to
terrify us from the start.
And then we're supposed to
somehow deal with reality
after they've scared the
living crap out of all of us.
And again, this is another thing
that Scarecrow is trying to do.
He realizes that he can
manipulate everybody
through fear.
And of course, the great
thing about this movie
is he gets a dose of his
own medicine by the end
and he sees the
fearful world that he
has created for himself.
Now he sees it.
And again, Nolan
is very concerned
about archetypes and
the destructive behavior
of the military
industrial complex.
And he uses that
throughout his films.
And he will get into these
falling into archetypes as we
go forward with the
Joker and with Bane,
who also falls into a role.
>> And even Michael Caine plays
the role of a very helpful sage
figure.
Michael Caine is the old sage.
He's the conscience
to Bruce Wayne.
Lucius, Morgan
Freeman, is going to be
the kind of dark knowledge
of technology figure.
>> That's right.
He's like Bruce
Wayne's Black Ops
division of his corporation.
He runs it.
And nobody knows what he does.
>> So the reason that
Christopher and Jonathan are
so good at telling stories is
the mastery of these Jungian
archetypes.
And that's how you control
not just fictional stories
but also from the dark side,
the way the Pentagon tries
to control us.
And I think the
positive aspect here
is that if we understand
Jungian psychology,
we can really tear
away a lot of the stuff
that we're supposed
to be afraid of.
>> Yeah, and Batman himself
in the movie uses terror too,
to cause fear for his opponents.
The famous scene where
he's knocking out
the mob near the
beginning of the scene.
One by one, he's pulling
them up and they don't even
know what it is
that's attacking them.
[SCREAMING]
>> Where were the
other drugs going?
>> I never knew.
>> And this is what he learned
in Ra's al Ghul's secret
initiation.
>> How to you use
fear as an advantage.
And as we go forward, we'll
see that works less and less
for him as he goes forward.
His ability to scare and
intimidate his opponents
starts lessening and
lessening, and he
has to rely on his own
wits and his brute strength
to get him through to the end.
>> It's also interesting
that he's a vigilante too.
It's not just Ra's al
Ghul that's a vigilante.
Bruce Wayne realizes that,
because I think he is
so wealthy...
billionaire, trillionaire
capitalist at the top
of this empire, he can see
that Gotham is corrupt.
The cops are corrupt.
That's also an important
part of the storyline,
if you remember the
cops are corrupt.
We saw this with Chinatown.
This is another theme
that comes up often
is that the normal channels
of where we go to have issues
solved.
The court system even.
Judges can be corrupted.
>> They're all corrupt.
>> What's the message here?
It's that we can't just
rely on someone else.
I mean, we have to
take responsibility
for our own lives.
And we can actually
choose to exit out
of this system of fear and
all this stuff, opt out of it,
go for a more natural lifestyle.
And I think that's the
message of all of this.
>> Yeah, I think
that in the end,
I think the Batman character
realizes this and that he needs
an escape out of the situation
that he's been placed in.
>> My takeaway from
"Batman Begins"
is predictive programming and
getting the deeper message
doesn't always come from
Hollywood or from famous
novels.
It also comes from
something that
was for a long time considered
very low class, very vulgar:
comic books.
And believe it or not, there's
a lot of predictive programming
in comic books.
I mean, there was all
kinds of 9/11 stuff
prior to 9/11 that showed
the images of the Twin Towers
being hit and so forth.
And I think that what you have
with the character of Batman
is Christopher Nolan
taking something that's
kind of Pulp Fiction-y
for kids and turning it
into a very complex,
very philosophical
psychological story.
And I that's what's most
interesting about it.
And the takeaway,
the message here,
is that the world is
run by secret societies.
There's good guys, there's
light side, dark side.
There's a real battle going
on out there, whether we're
conscious of it or not.
And if we're aware
of those things,
then we know how to avoid the
dangerous aspects of life.
Like all the chemical,
biological warfare
in this movie, we
know how to avoid
the toxins and the corporate
culture that we live in.
And we can also avoid being
a captive to mass media
fear and psyops.
The manipulation
of the archetypes
of the terrorists
that are everywhere
that are going to get us, which
is not a real fear that we
should have.
>> What a lot of people don't
realize is that the original
Batman comic book series and
this movie is consciously based
on the autobiography
of Teddy Roosevelt.
And Teddy Roosevelt was a very
wealthy kid who lived in a very
upscale environment,
very protected.
He went out West when
he was a young man.
He got beat up in New
York by a bunch of thugs.
And he was weak.
And he forced himself
to initiate himself
by going out West
and becoming a man.
And when he came back, he
became the Police Commissioner
of New York City.
And of course, one of
the main characters
is the Police Commissioner
in New York City.
And so this is also about the
initiation of the individual,
taking them from a
safe environment,
moving into an
unsafe environment,
and then coming back and making
this safe environment even
safer.
>> What does Nietzsche say?
What doesn't kill me
only makes me stronger.
>> That's right.
And that's what
this movie is about.
>> Exactly.
What I like about
where they take
this is that we're
going to progress
from this story into something
that's even more complex
and tries to bring in a
whole lot of new concepts
like the idea the syndicalist,
the Marxist syndicalist
of the character of Bane,
and in the chaotic evil
of the character of the Joker.
So I think that he
doesn't just give us
the bad guy like Ra's al Ghul.
We get something that
just kind of goes crazy.
And that's really what the
Joker's supposed to embody
is that evil that's doing evil
for no apparent reason, which
is more, I think, fearful
than the idea of just
a terrorist who's part
of some radical cause.
He has a manifesto, we
know why he's doing it.
We don't know why the Joker
is doing all this bombing
hospitals and doing crazy stuff.
So I like that wild
aspect of the villain.
>> Yeah.
And again, Nolan is a
very mature director.
And everything about
him is, there's not
really any childishness
going on here.
He takes a comic book,
which is ostensibly
written for young
males, and he's
turned it into a great film.
I mean, the cinematography,
the lighting, the soundtrack
is amazing.
He really, I think,
rebooted this whole thing
in such a mature way.
And we'll get into that
even more mature views
of the world in the next two.
>> Exactly.
Join us again next time
on "Hollywood decoded.
I'm Jay Dyer.
>> And I'm Jay Weidner.
Thanks for watching.
[THEME MUSIC]